what I'm going to talk about is of
course by mc3 a probabilistic
programming framework in Python so what
is probabilistic programming to quote
from their documentation probabilistic
programming allows for automatic based
on inference on user-defined
probabilistic models so put simply it's
just a Python library that allows you to
do Bayesian inference and there's the
three most popular ones that you can
find in Python or PI MC the one we'll
talk about there's Stan and there's also
Edward Edward is built on top of tensor
flow whereas finance is built on top of
Tiano
okay so what is based on inference then
it's a process where you start with some
prior assumptions or prior beliefs about
some aspect of the universe right and
then you look at evidence from data and
then you update those prior assumptions
based on evidence from data and you end
up with what is called the posterior
distribution and this process is very
abstract the way I describe it here but
we'll go through it through the
exercises so you'll get a sense of what
this really means so what are some of
the differences between frequentists
or classical statistics and Bayesian
statistics one of them is the use of
prior distributions on your models so
these prior distributions are how you
encode some prior beliefs about how some
model operates
whereas in frequentist models here I say
they usually are with the flat prior so
there's no prior beliefs but this this
is not entirely true actually because
there's a lot of hidden assumptions that
are encoded into frequentist models for
example a lot of the times it requires
normal normality right it is too much
formality things like that so but the
difference is that in the Bayesian
approach we will be very explicit about
the way we encode our assumptions and we
because we are more explicit we also
have more kind of freedom to customize
those assumptions are in our models
whereas with the frequentist models
you're stuck with let's say the
normality assumptions if you want to use
one technique or another an example of
the difference between the two so what
does it mean concretely having a prior
belief versus not having one let's say
that I cost I toss a coin 10 times and I
get 8 tails out of those 10 times now a
frequentist approach would basically
take the average of those eight out of
ten times and determine that on the next
toss then there's eight out of ten times
or 80% probability that I would get
tails rather than heads the Bayesian
approach will encode some assumption
about how cocoons work right we kind of
know that usually coins it's a 50/50
chance of getting heads or tails so a
Bayesian approach would encode that into
the model and then it would update its
prior beliefs of 50/50 probability based
on the coin tosses that it has seen and
in fact what would happen is if it is
true that the coin is unbiased then the
estimate of probability of the Bayesian
model will be more accurate than there
frequentist model because they're
freeing with this model will have very
much over fitted this small set of ten
coin tosses so in other words the
Bayesian prior beliefs have a kind of
regularization effect right so it
penalizes moving away from our prior
beliefs you need more evidence from your
data to move away from that prior belief
or yeah I should say it can have a
regularizing effect depending on how
restrictive that prior is but we'll go
into that well I'll show you examples of
that in action so another difference is
that basins like to preserve a notion of
uncertainty about estimates they care
about probabilities whereas the
frequentist models tend to try to get
rid of that
the Minister that uncertainty and focus
on a single point estimate and we'll see
that in our examples how the Bayesian
models they return more than just a
single point estimate they won't return
you in expectation they'll return you an
entire distribution design this one okay
so this is a summary of what I just said
in a way so this is from Bayesian
methods for hackers it's a free ebook
that I'll give you the link in a few
slides it's very interesting but this
quote kind of summarizes what I said
which is denote n as the number of
instances of evidence we possess as we
gather an infinite amount of evidence
say as n approaches infinity R based on
results aligned with frequentist results
hence for large n statistical inference
is more or less objective on the other
hand for small n inference is much more
unstable frequentist estimates have more
variance in larger confidence intervals
this is where Bayesian analysis excels
by introducing a prior and returning
probabilities instead of a scalar
estimates we preserve the uncertainty
that reflects the instability of
statistical inference of a small hand
data set okay so why do I prefer to use
when possible based an inference in
finance there are a few reasons one of
them is the fact that stochastic models
are more natural and convenient in
Bayesian approaches than the frequent
this one's in my opinion and we'll see
how that works another one is that the
priors make it easier for you to fit
risk neutral financial models so for
example if you'd you want to calibrate
the market making strategy or a mean
reversion strategy you don't necessarily
care about the trend aspect right you
don't care about whether it's more
likely to go up or down so in this case
you want a risk neutral model which is a
model that only estimates other things
like volatility so that you don't you
don't have to have any preconceptions as
to whether it's more likely to go one
way or the other
and this
is one way we're using priors would make
it much easier for you to do that also
stock returns they are not normal
distributions they are Koshi
distributions or more specifically
truncated kosher because you cannot lose
more than 100 percent at least when
you're along a stock so there's of
course many other exceptions but with
the typical case of going wrong taking a
long position in a stock
you cannot lose more than 100 percent so
it's a truncated Koshi
and because of that so the Cauchy
distribution does not have a mean you
cannot estimate the mean of a Cauchy
distribution using the traditional
frequentist techniques and this is a
reference if you're interested in that
you go which way more into detail about
why this is the case I also have a blog
post on that on my blog which shall give
you the URL in a few slides and finally
well randomness and uncertainty matter
right infrequent test models we try to
remove that we it's not about this
uncertainty it's not about the
probabilities it's more about the
expectation but in Bayesian models we
return the full distribution and we care
a lot about the distribution so those
are the recommended reading and
resources before I go into the exercises
because I'm pretty sure I will not
finish the entire slide so I'll give you
those right away the most important one
of course is the is my blog just because
you'll find the slides there after the
talk so you'll have to you have access
to the other references okay okay so
let's start with the exercises so first
of all I need to show you where to find
them so if you want to download the
exercises and run them on your laptop
you can always follow along with what I
say but if you want to run them
yourselves you can go to this URL so
github.com slash Simone at counseling /
introduction to PI MC 3 I'll give you a
few minutes to set all of this up so you
go there
oops so you right-click no you don't
wreck like you go down on this and click
this copy button to copy the URL and
then you go to a command line type git
clone and then you paste this URL so
this will fetch from github the code
into your directory give you some time
to do that sorry
so after that go to the directory you
checked out and check out this one pike
astok so github.com / pike astok / pike
astok sorry yeah you call this one as
well in into the the folder that you
checked out right so you checked out
introduction the privacy 3 then you did
CD introduction price it's really
checked out in that folder yourself
that's good and also if you have not
done it yet pip install PI mc3 to be
able to use prime c3 otherwise it's
going to be difficult to run the
examples
yeah my examples are in Python 2.7 so in
the first exercise we'll just fit a
normal distribution so the most basic
model you can think of pretty much so we
produced an artificial data set drawn
from a normal distribution and then
we're going to fill a simple model to
this data in order to estimate the mean
and the standard deviation of the normal
distribution that generated the data and
the anyone will show the effect of
overly restrictive priors kind of the
regularization effect I talked about
earlier and things like that so let's
open the exercise one okay so the first
line of course I generate my data so
into OBS why I draw 2,000 samples for
this normal distribution
and now this is where the primary model
comes in so we will always follow this
kind of template this notion of with
p.m. that model that instantiate a
primary model has some variable name
exercise one for this case and
everything that is declared within that
closure will be associated with that
model so when we start designing a
Bayesian model we always start from the
probability distribution we're
interested in
so the probability distribution of our
data here we assume that it's going to
be a normal distribution so we
instantiate a PM dot normal write a
normal distribution give it some name so
for each variable each prime city
variable that will have some string
attached to its own name and then we
parameterize the mu which is the mean
and then the standard deviation and we
have to be able to tell pi mc3 what data
is going to use to estimate the
parameters of our model so this is how
you this is how you do it you say
observed equals the variable that
contains your data now this is where we
set the prior distributions so we have
two parameters that we're trying to
estimate the mu and the standard
deviation and we're going to set some
prior beliefs about you know what range
approximately do we feel that the true
value isn't and what's distribution the
true value follows
so what i'm doing here i'm saying that i
believe that my mood parameter is
follows a normal distribution centered
around zero and is somewhere actually
that's that's the second exam example i
want to show them we're gonna start with
a more less restrictive prior on that so
let's say that i believe that it's
somewhere within one standard deviations
at zero in a normal distribution right
and similarly on my standard deviation
here i'm going to set a half normal why
is that is because I know that a
standard deviation cannot be negative so
I'm going to already constrain it to
being a half normal distribution because
I have normal stops at zero cannot go
negative so I'm saying that my F my
standard deviation my beliefs about this
parameter are that it follows a half
normal distribution and is within
approximately one standard deviation of
the the zero
and then I'm going to run the inference
algorithm so in this case it's going to
be Markov chain Monte Carlo will talk a
little bit about other algorithms that
can be used but throughout most of the
most of those examples unless otherwise
specified it's going to be MC MC so
Markov chain Monte Carlo and this is how
we do it so p.m. that sample and we
specify a number of drawers so this is
where it's a bit different than frequent
test techniques because this is not
going to be returning a single point
estimate it's what we're going to be
doing here is well first of all we're
going to be estimating by looking at the
data what is the most likely what are
the most likely values of the MU in the
standard deviation that produced that
data and this will be answered not as a
single point value but a a probability
distribution that that represents the
uncertainty that the model has about the
values the true values of those
parameters so what we're going to do is
we're going to take samples from those
posterior distributions so I'm going to
take here arbitrarily a thousand samples
from the posterior distribution of my
STD F parameter distribution and
similarly for my mu parameter
distribution and I'm going to have them
in the trace Val variable so the trace
is a dictionary where for each of the
free random variables in your model so
in this case we have to the standard
deviation in mu for each of those will
have those 1,000 drawers that we made
from our posterior distribution so again
the posterior distribution is what the
model believes these parameter values to
be after having looked at the data right
and then I'm going to plot those
posterior distributions for
troubleshooting or in this case more
educational reasons now this is the
trace plot right that I was showing so
this shows
the beliefs of the model so to speak
about the moon variable and the standard
deviation now you see that the the the
expectation of that belief is around 0.5
right a little bit below but it's around
0.5 as it should be
because our data or our code we reset it
at we set it at 0.5 and the standard
deviation we set it at 0.35 so let's go
back to the trace plot so there's a
little bit of uncertainty by like point
0 1 approximately but you know it's
roughly correct and here the standard
deviation is around 0.35 as it should be
based on the way we generated the data
okay so so far so good
now let's see what happens if I have
much less data so let's say I have 800
data points and let's say that for
whatever reason I placed I set my prior
beliefs to something much more
restrictive so I believe it's within
point zero 5 of 0.05 the standard
deviation is point zero five for my
normal distribution here and the same
for my half normal distribution so now
my belief is that it's much closer to
zero than previously thought and I have
much less data now we know because we
generated the data we know that this is
wrong right we know that the actual
value is actually quite far from zero at
least relative to what I set here for
both parameters and this is where we
will see a bit of a regular rising
effect so this trace plot is the one
with these more restricted
prior beliefs and the lesser amount of
data or lesser amount of evidence so you
see that the moon was estimated at 0.3
it was not able to go all the way to 0.5
because there was not enough evidence
from the data to go that much far that
much further from our prior beliefs
about the model now the standard
deviation is pretty good it's almost
there
like 0.33 okay so why is it regularizing
is because it keeps it close to zero
unless it sees a lot of evidence
otherwise so this is a you can think of
this as a kind of way to counterbalance
outliers and things like that in your
data okay so now I had a first version
it estimated the parameters correctly
then I restricted very much the prior
distributions and as well I reduced the
amount of data and now it's having
trouble finding the real values because
there's too much essentially
regularization but I'm going to keep
those priors those restrictive priors
and then I'm going to go back to the
original 2000 data points and now we're
back to the original estimates that are
good so in other words given enough
evidence given enough data it will find
the right value even if even if the
correct value is kind of beyond that
your your prior beliefs I mean giving
giving enough data you know it's a
rational model it's going to update its
beliefs about the world if it sees
enough times that it's wrong right so
that's the general idea okay so let's
move on to exercise two now
so we're going to be fitting a simple
linear regression
so we'll produce an artificial data set
representing two variables drawn payment
known from the normal distribution
correlated with each other by simple
linear relationship and then we will fit
a linear regression model to estimate
the coefficient of x and the intercept
and then we will talk about the
posterior predictive checks which is
just a fancy words for making
predictions from your model so I
generate some data so I have X with our
draw which are draws from a normal
distribution with a mean of one standard
deviation of 0.1 I have some noise some
model noise so zero drawn from a normal
distribution with a mean of zero and a
standard deviation of 0.1 and my Y the
relationship between x and y is
expressed by this formula so y equals
0.65 times X plus 0.5 which is my
intercept and now the goal of my model
will be to reverse engineer that formula
and discover what is my beta coefficient
and what is my alpha intercept so as
always we start from the probability
distribution so we expect that Y follows
a normal distribution so we instantiate
a p.m. normal we link it to the observed
data or bsy but now this is where it
gets a bit different from the previous
exercise because now we're not just
fitting a distribution right we care
about a relationship between two
variables so the way this is expressed
is that the mean of your normal
distribution will be determined by some
coefficient times X plus some intercept
okay
and then we're going to try to estimate
the coefficient which is one of the
three variables and intercept which is
another one of those three variables and
the model has some error which is the
noise that we had initially so we
captured that with St Det so in other
words this STD parameter represents the
lowest parameter here the coefficient
parameter represents well 0.65 is the
multiplier and the intercept represents
0.5 so those are the values that it
should find if it works correctly and so
the standard deviation as before because
it's it's a standard deviation it cannot
go negative so I know that I have a
prior knowledge that you know it doesn't
go below zero so that ends the half
normal the intercept it could go
negative go positive so I just fit it as
a normal distribution and similarly for
the coefficient I don't know if it's
positive negative or again normal
distribution and now I do p.m. that
sample so I fit the data essentially and
I plot the trace of that so let me start
by showing what that looks like
so now I have three random variables
three random variables my intercept
which was estimated to be around 0.5
which is correct my beta which is my
coefficient which was estimated to be
around 0.65 which is also correct and
the standard deviation which is my noise
in my model estimated at 0.1 which
corresponds to the standard deviation of
my noise parameter here but now we're
going to make predictions
so we have a model refitted it how do we
make predictions based on that model so
for now we're going to make predictions
based on the training data and in a
later exercise setting the next one I
will show how to do it on out-of-sample
data so using new data and so the first
thing you might notice while looking at
this code is that nowhere do i specify
the x values for my predictions right
this is because implicitly the way
sample PPC works implicitly it uses it
uses the X values so to speak that you
were using for your training to train
your model and again I'll show you in
another example how to explicitly
specify some other values of X so here
what we do is sample PPC so PPC is for a
posterior predictive check and in later
versions of Pinus III is going to become
so this function will be deprecated and
it will become sample posterior
predictive just a note okay so you pass
it the trace that you received from
earlier and then here I specify 1000
samples so that the output of that is
not necessarily intuitive so I'm going
to explain what the what the structure
is of this Y Preds variable essentially
so if you look at this screenshot oops
the shape of my white creds variable is
1000 by 10,000 so let's look at what
those values are so Y Preds is simply
the so in my dictionary returned by
simple PPC I get the Y variable which is
what I'm interested in in looking at and
I output the shape so the shape there
was the 1000 here that we have in the
shape
is simply the number of samples that
we're drawing so the way to think of
this and the 10,000 is the N the number
of data points in our data set right so
we generated 10,000 data points okay so
we have 10,000 data points and 1,000
draws for each data point so the way to
think of this is simply that it goes
through every single data point so every
single value of x in my data and for
each of those it draws 1000 values of
the posterior distributions of the
variables that I have estimated based on
yet based because of the uncertainty in
those estimates there's going to be some
randomness and death right
and with those it produces predictions
so for each of your values of X you'll
get 1,000 predictions slightly different
due to the randomness inherent in the
uncertainty of the estimation of my
parameters sorry yes exactly that's yeah
so here I take my prediction so as I was
saying for each of my values of X I have
a thousand predictions but let's say
that for my problem here I'm not
interested in plotting the full
uncertainty of those predictions I'm
only interested in plotting the
expectations my best guess my best
prediction so to speak so what I do
simply is I take the mean on the axis 0
so I take the mean of each thousand data
points right so I get for each value of
x I get my best guess estimate my best
prediction and this is why this is what
I plot here so in green is my estimate
and in blue is the actual data are there
any questions about this
okay yeah
sorry which lane yeah why do I take the
mean because so my white predictions let
me show you the shape of this variable
right I have one thousand by ten
thousand these ten thousand here are the
data points but for each of the data
points I have one thousand predictions
the reason I have one thousand
predictions is that I don't have a
single value for my estimates of X and
the intercept I have a full distribution
that represents my uncertainty about the
estimates right so these 1000
predictions are based on random draws
from these estimates now because I Karen
this for this problem that I care about
the expectation of that I take the mean
but maybe I'm interested in the
uncertainty of my predictions then maybe
I'll take the quantiles of each of those
thousand data points right maybe I want
to know what is the probability that's
within the the middle 50% range then
I'll look into quantiles or something
like that so there's a lot of different
things I can do with these thousand data
points that are drawn for my estimate of
my parameters so now we'll go into
logistic regression
so we'll produce an artificial data set
but now the outcome the Y variable will
be binary so 0 or 1 and this will be as
a function of a random variable X drawn
from a uniform distribution and then we
will fit a logistic regression model to
that to estimate the coefficient X and
the intercept of our logistic regression
model and now we will do again posterior
predictive checks but now we will use
of sample data so we'll show you how to
do that okay so the logistic regression
okay
so as usual I generate values of X in
this case I grabbed them from a uniform
distribution between 0 & 1
and then I generate y so the way I
generate Y is if my value of x is above
0.7 plus a little bit of noise I set my
Y to one otherwise I set my Y to 0
that's just a way of introducing it not
a cosmo but a correlation between X and
the output Y and this is this is how
we're going to be making it possible to
swap out the X training data and use
some validation data that's it to make
predictions out-of-sample so we use a
piano shared layer and we used use it to
wrap our X variable and now we're going
to be using x shared in our model rather
than using X itself directly because I
know that it's binomial so 0 and 1 I'm
going to describe it as a Bernoulli
distribution which is a special case of
a binomial distribution so in other
words the Bernoulli distribution is 0
and 1 and the parameter P determines the
rate of success so a Bernoulli
distribution with P equals 0.5 means
that you're equally likely to get 0 and
1 and if it's 0.8 you have 80% chance of
getting 1 and 20% chance of getting 0
for very simple distribution now the
expected value here will represent my
peeper ammeter that I'm trying to
estimate and try to estimate what is the
likelihood of getting one versus 0 and
here this estimate is how I is where I
place my essentially my logistic
regression
so notice that it's the same pattern as
the linear regression from multiplying X
by some coefficient and I add an
intercept the only difference here is
that now I pass it through a sigmoid or
an inverse logistic function which has
four effects of transforming the output
of this which is a continuous variable
into something that is beyond that is
between zero and one and that represents
the probability of getting one or the
probability well it represents the
probability of getting one and from
there you can collapse that into a
prediction of zero or prediction of one
so again since same pattern so we have a
coefficient that we're trying to
estimate and we have an intercept that
we're trying to estimate yeah so we run
the sample the sampling return a
thousand data points we plot the
estimates I get that here now notice
that these values are not anywhere so
the way I generated my data it's not as
explicit as in the previous exercise
where you know my my data was generated
in the exact same way that I modeled it
it's a bit more this coefficient is
hidden in my data right I don't know not
in my data in my code that generates my
data right there's no way to really know
what is that coefficient so by looking
at only this there's no way to really
know if it worked or not but that's okay
because we're going to be using
posterior predictive checks and we're
going to be comparing the output of that
so here this is where I swap out so I
swap out well first I generate from test
data right so I create an entirely
amount entirely new set of
values and then I use my same code that
I used to generate the training data to
generate the y-values and then I do X
share that set value on test X which
will now tell the the model to use this
data to make predictions rather than the
training data now the rest is the same
as in the previous exercise so sample
PPC I give it a trace the name of my
model the number of samples to draw per
value of x in this case 500 I take the
mean because again I'm here in this case
it just happens that I'm interested in
the expectations or the best possible
prediction so to speak and I plot the
relationship so let me show you the plot
for each value of x what is the value of
y so 0 and 1 and you see that because in
my data I said if it's greater than 0.7
set it to 1 and there's a little bit of
noise but basically right if it's
greater than 0.7 suddenly becomes 1 so
that's the data I'm trying to estimate
and this is the output of my model so
the output the Y value is the
probability of having 1 right it's a
probability so if it's greater than 0.5
the typical heuristic that you'll use is
if the probability of getting 1 is
greater than 0.5 then I'm going to make
a prediction that I'm going to get a 1
if it's less than 0.5 then I'm going to
make a prediction that I'm going to get
a 0 so as you can see at around 0.7
which is my threshold the probability
becomes 0.5 and beyond that it's more
likely to get a 1 so in other words
this model has correctly fitted the data
and it generalizes through out-of-sample
data as well yeah before I did not have
that line here
I was just reusing the same training
data so I was making prediction with the
training data which is a bit cheating in
a way right I think it relies on on
properly crafting your priors if you do
that properly if the problem is very
well very well defined you might be able
to get away with it now if you do more
like neural networks which we'll go into
I don't know if you could get away with
that you might still over fit and you
might still want to check if your
overfitting yeah so I'm not so sure that
and if you look at frequent test methods
the simple statistical techniques like
this they don't do over add they don't
do cross-validation right so the
cross-validation comes in when you do
more advanced machine learning usually
because it's that that's where it
becomes possible to to overfit so I
think that it still holds but only when
you do like Bayesian neural networks and
things like that here it gets a little
bit more subtle so I'm going to define a
data generative process that has a
common factor so a top-level factor and
then it's going to have a few
idiosyncratic or let's say specialized
factors that are drawn from that
top-level factor and these are supposed
to represent the data points that I'm
observing so let's take a concrete
example in finance probably the most
obvious thing is stocks and industry
industry sectors so let's say that I'm
looking at the energy sector and the
stocks within the energy sector so that
my top level factor could be what's my
daily return
on the energy sector so presumably this
there's a common systemic return in the
energy sector that is common to all
stocks of the energy sector but then
each of those starts each of those
stocks has its own alpha that kind of
has its own momentum let's say so you
have a top-level factor that represents
the really returns of your energy sector
and then for each of the second-level
factors they could represent the the the
distribution of the daily returns of
your individual stocks within the energy
sector and then those would be fitted to
the actual observations from day to day
returns for each of those stocks so
that's that's just an example to explain
the general idea so we'll do something
like that and we'll fit in on
hierarchical model first
so we'll fit a model that simply tries
to estimate each of these second level
factors separately and then we'll fit a
model that is hierarchical so that we'll
have this notion of the top level factor
from which the parameters of the second
level factors are drawn and we will
compare the fit the goodness of fit
let's say of those two parameters oops
not yet okay okay so this hierarchical
model approach it tends to work well
when you don't have a lot of data
especially when you don't have a lot of
data per factor for each other so each
of those factors can be thought of as a
category let's say so for each of those
categories if you only have at say 10
examples 20 examples then this method
will tend to shine more than if you have
you know tens of thousands of examples
for each category so this is why here
what I do I'm generating only a hundred
data points with a total of 15 different
factors or categories and so n per
factors or each of those factors would
have n per factor examples for each of
themselves
and then we have this common beta common
alpha because here I'm framing it as a
linear regression yeah it's a linear
regression problem so we have a beta
coefficient and we have it and alpha
intercept so this is why I'm gonna have
a top-level beta coefficient and the top
level alpha intercept distribution so
the MU of that top level is for the
coefficient is five point six and the
move of the intercept is going to be one
and I use the same standard deviation
for both of these zero point one so here
I go through each of the factors and I
produce the parameters for those factors
so I draw from a normal distribution
described by the top-level parameters I
draw the actual beta for that factor in
the actual alpha for that factor I add
them to my factors list and then here
this is where I generate the actual data
so I iterate through each of my factors
I draw well this is going to be X
essentially so I draw some x from a
normal distribution I I need to save for
each of my data points I need to save
which factor was used to generate that
data row so indices and then here this
is where I generate my Y so Y again the
same familiar pattern y equals F 1 so f
1 corresponds to my beta for my factor
and F 0 corresponds to my alpha for my
factor so f 1 times the innovation or
the x plus my intercept gives me my wife
so I add
so I add the X I add the index and I had
the Y for each of those data points that
I generate and then I place them in a
shared layer for the reasons we've seen
in the previous exercise and now I'm
going to generate to estimate a
non-hierarchical version first of the
model so what we're doing here so we're
doing a normal we're representing Y as a
normal distribution with the expected
value corresponding to this so it's a
regression problem so the beta of my the
beta of the factor for which my current
row is associated with that's why I
needed to save for each one need to save
which factor it was drawn from so this
is how I fetch it here so my beta from
for this factor times X plus the Alpha
for this factor this gives my my move
for my normal distribution of my Y
variable and the beta and the Alpha so
the the beta and the Alpha for my
factors they're estimated as normal
distributions and notice that the shape
here so in all previous examples my
shape was implicitly one right there
were scalars now here what I'm doing is
I have a vector of num factors instances
of each of those random variables so I'm
going to be estimating 15 separate
intercepts and 15 separate coefficients
each corresponding to the individual
factors so I okay here I do something
new so tune I needed to do that because
so essentially the inference algorithm
it draws data points not data points but
it draws samples from the parameter
space and it tries to find the most
probable values of the parameters that
have generated the data that we're
looking at and then it puts those into
essentially the trace right but at the
beginning the first few samples that
it's drawing will not be optimal values
of the parameters so usually what you
see is a kind of curve where it starts
like way off from the optimal value and
then it converges to the optimal value
but what this tune parameter is saying
is that this card or well yeah discard
the first 2000 parameter estimates
because I'm assuming that they're not
very good I want to get the next 2000
parameter estimates after that so in
total and when I show you the trace pot
you'll see on the right graphs that
you'll have 4,000 where is that true do
they show at the tuning ones no they
don't show it but you see in the
progress bar actually that's where I was
confusing it so in the progress bar you
see there's 4,000 data points so the
algorithm is drawing 4,000 data points
in total and the first two thousand data
points are just there two for the time
it takes to figure out the optimal
values and then it gives me the it gives
me the remaining 2000 and this is why by
the way if in this in these graphs if
you see that in the beginning it starts
at a certain place and then it converges
it means that you probably need to
increase your tuning because if it's
fetching for you values that are
suboptimal right so here we're saying
that it we're saying that it's very
stable in the parameter estimate values
that it draws meaning that before that
it has successfully converged so the
values were getting there are good
representations of our estimates okay
so yeah I draw samples I plot what I
just showed and then I do sample PPC and
here I calculate the so the root mean
squared deviation is another word for
the root mean squared error so in other
words my wire predictions minus the
actual Y values that's my error each of
those I square so that's the squared
error I take the mean of all those
that's the mean squared error and now I
just take the root the square root of
that so I have my root mean squared
error or root mean squared deviation and
I display that actually I'll show a so
the comparison of both after I've
discussed the hierarchical version so
now the I record hierarchical version so
we still have everything here is the
same right we still have these a and B
one for each factor because we still
have in there hierarchical version we'll
still gonna have fifteen fifteen beta
coefficients and 15 intercepts however
these values are no longer you know
constants here they're drawn from
another random variable which is our top
level factor so we're gonna be
estimating the MU a and the move B and
then as well the Sigma of a and Sigma of
be like if you if you go back to the
beginning these new random variables
represent these things right from which
we were drawing the values of the
idiosyncratic factors so that's the
new elements compared to the
non-hierarchical version we're adding
these top-level factors and we're using
them to parameterize our individual
factors and then we again do the same
thing run the sampling we get some
values these and we evaluate the
accuracy with the same root mean squared
deviation and this is the okay
the root mean squared error of our non
hierarchical model is 0.318
and so forth and the root mean squared
error of our hierarchical model is 0.17
proximately so in this case the
hierarchical hierarchical model is more
accurate than the non hierarchical
version and so the natural question now
is why is that I won't go into too much
detail except that I'll give the general
intuition that there's this notion
called shrinkage which is the idea that
by doing that by pulling the individual
factor into a common factor you are
essentially it's essentially a form of
regularization where if there are
outliers in each of your examples the
parameter estimates for your NGO suit in
do syncretic factors will be pulled
towards the common factor okay and this
this URL which is in the documentation
for primacy tree to give an example you
give an example of a hierarchical model
and they kind of you know visualize what
happens they kind of let you visualize
the actual shrinkage that goes on you
see in the non hierarchical version that
the estimates are kind of all over the
place because of these unusual outlier
values and then you see with the
hierarchical version that the estimates
get pulled towards this top-level common
factor so that's kind of the high level
intuition but if you want to go into it
I recommend you have a look at this
exercise or rather this page of the
documentation
yeah it is
I mean hierarchical modeling is the kind
of feature engineering you have to know
when to use it when it makes sense to
use it and when it makes sense to use it
is when you don't have too many examples
per category and because of that you're
very vulnerable to outliers so just
estimating each of those individually
it's like going back to my example at
the beginning with the 10 coin tosses
then you're going to be very vulnerable
to weird random effects whereas if you
use the whole data set so yeah so neural
networks so we will produce a data set
with a multi-dimensional well two
dimensions nonlinear effect and a
continuous target variable so it will be
a regression problem now of course you
will see that the the data set that will
use this is a toy data set to very small
dimensionality and like normally you
would not need a neural network for that
so so we will model a Bayesian neural
network to fit the data and then we will
evaluate the model the X is generated as
all the values between -5 and 5 by
increments of point zero one and my Y is
generated as the square of X so very
simple actually
and it wasn't it it wasn't even
multi-dimensional actually that's a
mistake it's so again we do their shared
layers I'm going to have my neural
network the structure that I will use
will be two hidden layers with five
nodes per layer so the way I start here
is just because you need to initialize
your weights and you're no Lynette your
neural networks so I just unit one to
initialize the first layer and a two
inch layer and second layer and it Out's
to initialize the output
random initialization of the required
shape so yet I might talk about the
shape so the first layer represents the
connection between the the number of
features in your X vector and the number
of nodes in your first layer therefore
the the shape of the first layer will be
X dot shape 1 so the number of features
in this case 1 by and hidden the number
of nodes in your first layer in this
case 5 whereas the second layer because
it connects to the second layer
represents the weight that connect the
first layer well the first thing of
nodes with the second layer of nodes so
it will be number of nodes by a number
of nodes so and end in by na Dhin and
because the init init out represent the
initializations for the weights between
the second layer and the output layer
which has only one node then the shape
of that will be five by one okay so
first I sigh I set my weights and my
biases so if you're if you're not
familiar with that the weights
essentially are like the beta
coefficient in our regression so they're
multiplier for X and the bias is the
intercept sorry it adds a constant to
that layer so all of my hidden nodes in
my neural network will be defined as a
normal distribution centered around zero
with a standard deviation that I set
that ten and I believe now here this
standard deviation as you may have
guessed by now acts as a kind of
regularizer
regular riser so if I reduce this to a
very small value then it will be much
more difficult for the values of my
weights to diverge from zero
now the structure of my weights is as
described for the initializations right
so one by five for the second the
Earth's five by five and for the output
layer it's five by one and I have as
many biases as I have hidden nodes
hence the N hidden and now I put all of
those together so my first layer in my
neural network mathematically
corresponds to the dot product of my
input values my input data points my X
multiplied by the weights of my first
layer the weight of the connections of
my first layer plus the biases for my
first layer and I pass them through
eight NH function for the non-linearity
I for those of you who know a bit more
about deep learning I was not able to
find a real you activation function in
my MC 3 so I'm not sure if it's possible
to do that or not in the examples in the
documentation or that they use panitch
which i guess is you know it's the next
best best thing probably so I pass them
through that and that becomes my first
layer now my second layer below that is
again the dot product of the output of
my first layer times the weights of my
second layer plus the bias of the second
layer and finally I define my output
layer as the output of the second layer
times the weight the weight of my
output node here I do not wrap it in a
10 H because I'm doing a linear and
doing a nonlinear regression and during
a regression problem so I want the
output to be to be continuous and then I
wrap it in a normal distribution and I
assign it to the data the Y basically my
Y values and an output and I do my
sampling as usual here I do not do a
trace plot because at this point it
becomes a very abstract you're just
looking at weights and connections and I
mean so I make predictions with sample
PPC collect those in y Preds
I take the means and then I calculate
the root mean squared error and then I
show also the scatter plot of the actual
X 2y and then the predicted X to Y so
what that looks like is this now this is
actually two curves so behind it there's
a blue curve representing the true data
and above it is the orange curve
representing the predictions of our
neural network which are obviously very
close to the real data yes in this case
we will see in the next one the
stochastic neural network that it's a at
least for me was a bit slower than C so
I'll show you how to do it with the
variational inference now just before I
go to the next one I want to show you a
pike astok so podcasting is something
I'm working on so this is a shameless
self-promotion here so by casting what
it's trying to do is basically be like a
chaos to tensorflow or design to Tiano
in other words it acts as a higher-level
library to simplify no stochastic neural
networks and things like that using
prime C 3 so I'll just show you what it
looks like if you use podcasting
instead of recording directly in PI mc3
so of course the data generation is
exactly the same so the problem is
exactly the same output is exactly the
same but now the part where we define
the neural network so instead of
defining all of this here we'll be
saying so give me a base in your network
where the first layer has five nodes and
the second layer has five nodes and the
inference method that I want to use is
MC MC by default it's variational
inference because it tends to be faster
but you can specify explicitly MC MC and
then as in any typical machine learning
library you just do like model dot fit
and then you pass your x and y and it
fits your data now you have to specify a
number of samples for the reasons we've
been looking at there's a default I
think of 500 or something like that so
you fit your neural network and then you
call and then not predict X it makes
your predictions it outputs them like
we've been doing so it takes the mean
now if you don't want to take the mean a
method that is not yet implemented what
I'm working on is generate which will
output a full probability distribution
instead of just the expectation and then
you can use you can do dot rmsd to
calculate the root mean squared error so
the result of running that is exactly
the same just to show that the code is
equivalent is just it makes it easier if
you're if you're not interested in
customizing so much all the low-level
stuff you can use this so there's two
networks there's the Bayesian neural
network which is yeah it's a fish forum
feed-forward neural network and then the
other one is the stochastic neural
network which will sorry
no it's not so stochastic is the notion
that sometimes you'll have non
stationary variables but I'll get into
that no no no no yeah feet forward
okay so exercise six so this is about
stochastic models or the notion of the
Catholic model and this is where I think
Bayesian approaches will shine compared
to frequentist approaches because so far
everything we've done it can be done in
a conventional context but this becomes
much more difficult so let's say that
for example you have some the
coefficients of your let's see we have a
relationship like we expressed before
like y equals some coefficient times X
plus some intercept but now let's say
that the value of this beta or the value
of this intercept changes with time
right there's a drift on it so it could
be that it follows a random walk it
could be that there's a seasonal effect
on it it could be that it's a kind of
mean reverting a spiking process like
volatility is something like that so how
can we still figure out the other
elements of our model how can we still
fit this model but accounting for the
fact that there is some non stationarity
because the conventional machine
learning approaches all expect that the
distribution of your training data set
is the same as the distribution of your
test data set or your validation data
set right there in other words the
distribution must be stationary but not
with this not with this with piles
satori it's not necessary so what I'll
show you is I'll take a trainer data set
and we will produce a time varying
coefficient for the relationship between
x and y thereby introducing a non
stationary effect and we will slightly
transform our static neural network from
exercise 5 into a stochastic neural
network that is able to capture this non
stationarity
and then by computational necessity I
will show you how to use variational
inference rather than MCMC so we start X
as in the previous exercise so all the
values from -5 to 5 with increments of
point 0 1 and then we have some this is
the linearity coefficient is going to be
what varies over time if you look at my
loop here for T in range 1000 at each
time step I will increase or increment
this coefficient by point 0 0 0 2 and
the effect of this we if we look at what
how we construct the Y value Y value is
equal to this linearity coefficient
times X plus 1 minus this linearity
coefficient times some some nonlinear I
think it's this is an inverse logistic
function if I remember correctly of X so
it's like an S shape right so this part
produces an X shape this part produces a
straight line but now as time advances
this value increases therefore this
value decreases so the impact of this
part will get it will start to dominate
more and more in the production of the Y
values so what you'll see is that at
time T 0
you start with an S shape and as time
advances it kind of straights it
straightens out into a straight line and
we'll see some charts of that
[Applause]
so this is the data if you look at it
without looking at time right if you
just take the whole snapshot the whole
data set so you see that so this is
caused by the time varying effect so
here I will produce a neural network
with two nodes on the first layer five
nodes on the second layer and I'll get
back to the interval thing so first I do
the same kind of initialization as I've
done in the previous exercise and so
let's let's look at the gaussian random
walk so this is the key element in
producing this stochastic neural network
is that the nodes of my first layer my
first hidden layer instead of being
instead of using a prior distribution
that is a normal I'm going to be using a
prior distribution that is a Gaussian
random walk so what that means is that
instead of saying okay I want you to
estimate a value that is constant on
this full data set
instead I want you to estimate a value
that can evolve through time on this
data set and specifically the interval
value here corresponds to how many times
you allow it to change throughout your
time series okay so the more the higher
this value the more granular the fit
will be but usually like to high F it is
usually a bit overkill and it's also
more computationally expensive so I keep
it 220 in this case it's a bit arbitrary
it's like one of those hyper parameters
that you can tweak yeah so now my
weights are able to change 20 times
throughout the time steps in my data but
are they allowed to change freely like
can they take any value they want no
because that would be
that would allow a bit too much
overfitting so I needed to follow a
certain standard deviation which is
defined by my random variable step size
it has all standard deviations like it's
a half normal and then I provided the
shapes of the shape the shape
corresponds to the number of the number
of Gaussian random walks that I'm using
in my neural network and because there
are two nodes in my first layer I'm
using two Gastner in the box so I have
two distinct standard deviations to
estimate this aspect here this is a bit
of this is a data manipulation trick or
thing because what this will do is it
will output only 20 20 weights along the
along the data axis right because I only
have an interval of 20 but of course 20
when I do them at the the dot products
you can't multiply 20 by and by your
number of data points so what I have to
do is use TT so GT is T I know that
tensor so T T dot repeat of my weights
and I repeat them the length of my data
divided by interval so this will allow
me to duplicate each of my weights as
many times as necessary to get a total
number of weights equal to the total
number of data points that I have in
time but still it's only allowed to
change these weights are only allowed to
change 20 times right and after that the
rest is essentially the same here is
slight differences I do batch dot
because now I'm multiplying two
dimensions because of the notion of time
right that we're adding to this and then
tan H and here this is where I do
variational inference
so I can do basically this is kind of
slightly overkill I can do it like like
this I could use a string so I method so
you do PM dot fit this is the a hyper
parameter for your variational inference
so usually the higher this is the more
accurate your estimation will meet and
then you can do method equals ad V like
this or you can do method equals p.m.
dot add V like this its equivalent oops
this goes into a variable and now notice
here when I sample
I don't do pm that sample I run a use
sample on my variable here that was
returned by p.m. dot fit and then as
usual I say how many draws I want and I
plot that which gives this kind of
nonsense but it's actually interesting
to look at this one here because if you
remember if you remember there are two
Gaussian random walk nodes okay and for
each of those nodes I have 20 weights
that I have to estimate so if you look
at all these little distributions here I
would I didn't count them but I would
bet that there's 20 of them here and 20
of them here these would be for each
time step for each interval increment
the value that was estimated for that
interval okay on the own that's it the
first node and on the second node the
same thing for each of those interval
increments this is the value that was
estimated now I make my predictions
calculate rule in square deviation and I
show okay so I show the output now this
first version I just show the output on
the whole data set I don't separate by
by time intervals let's say so in blue
is was the original data right the raw
data in orange is the the predictions
that my model made but they're really in
the more interesting one is this one so
now here we look at the data that was
generated for time steps 0 to 200 and
then 200 to 400 then 400 to 600 600 to
800 and then 800 to 1,000 so if you look
at the raw data you see this time
varying effect I was talking about right
so the the the relationship becomes
increasingly linear essentially or
straight like a straight line rather
than be an S and we also see that the
neural network is able to follow along
right no well is it the same parameter
it's technically it's different weights
right because my prior distribution
allows me to have 20 different weights
that evolve through time so for each
time step I'm allowed to have a
different weight value so in that sense
there are different weights here the
weights are different for it for my
first two nodes in my neural network
when I make predictions for that time
step I'm going to have different going
to be using different weight values for
my coefficients then when I do it here
or here this is why it's able to adapt
well I guess I guess it's not I guess
you could take your data set and then
separate it in slices through time and
then train one there one there one there
I guess it's in a way it's different
because for the same reason that the
hierarchical model is different than the
non hierarchical hierarchical model
because you're going to be for the rest
for the other parameters you're going to
be using all of the data set when you're
estimating whereas if you split them
into individual data set you're only
using a smaller amount of data for fixed
parameters
[Music]
yeah yeah and that would work for this
example because this example the the
time the the nature of the time
relationship is linear right it just
monana monotonically increases but what
if this was instead a random walk right
now your T parameter that represents
your time index is not correlated to the
that linearity coefficient right now now
for that you will use in the frequentist
approach you would use a Kalman filter
but now if it's not a random walk if
it's something more complex then that
this is where you're kind of out of
tools and they're frequentist toolbox
this is where you could encode something
like mean reverting Orenstein alone back
process or whatever it is that you want
to come up with right you could encode
the nature of this time varying effect
however you like right and so once again
if you want to use pike a stick for this
it all those lines of code become this
so I just instantiate a stochastic
neural network so a stochastic neural
network is just a neural network where
the first layer will be Gaussian random
blocks and then I say that I want three
by three or rather three nodes on my
first layer three nodes in my second
layer which by the way is different from
the exercise that I just showed but the
results are similar and then that's my
interval parameter right because now we
have to say how many times we allow
these time steps to change or these
weights to change rather and by default
here because I don't specify MCMC is
going to use add V it's going to use
variational inference and when you do
that you might want to specify a number
of samples not number of samples but an
n for your variational inference that is
different from the default I think my
default is 50,000 but the rest is very
much the same and the result is close
enough like that yeah
yeah no I didn't like it I prefer that's
why I kind of went for a primacy three
with this presentation I've between
Edward and Pines that we are very much
liked by the Satori better the
communities is larger the documentation
as you say is better okay so now we can
go maybe since we have time I can do a
few examples that are more directly
related to finance so in this example
here what I do is I look at real so I
have a real data set for stock returns
of a low liquidity stock and now I have
every single take every single trade so
it's a high-frequency data set so I
would like let's say to model the
returns to model the return distribution
of my stock returns we will see that the
Cauchy distribution is pretty much a
better fit to that than the Gaussian
distribution which is very coherent with
the literature on that topic so that's
example one if you'll follow along so I
load my data files stock returns dot CSV
I only look at the first thousand data
points just for computational reasons
and it's enough to get a good estimate
but the very first thing that I do I
want to model it as a normal
distribution so p.m. dot normal I have
to estimate my mu in my standard
deviation so mu is as in the exercise
one right so normal distribution
centered around zero I give it a point
one standard deviation of one and then
the standard deviation is the half
normal standard deviation of one i run
the trace around the sampling and then
here i produce predictions and i compare
we will visualize the histograms so i
will show a histogram
my fitted model and a histogram of the
real model the real data so visually we
will compare them first it looks like
this so we can see that well first of
all the real returns are much more
concentrated around zero but also the
tails are much wider so it can go up to
minus 0.05 per tick from minus 0.05 to
0.05 and even a little bit more whereas
my modelled returns only go from minus
0.001 to 0.01 so even visually it's
pretty obvious that stock returns do not
follow a normal distribution all right
it's a high frequency so every single
trade that occurs I have about 70 73,000
trades for like maybe a year of data or
something and it's a little it's a
little quiddity stock so it doesn't
trade a lot but ok so that's the normal
distribution now let's do a cauchy so so
if you don't know the Cauchy
distribution its characteristic is that
it has very wide tail so it's very
narrow center very very wide tails so a
higher probability of extreme events
occurs in the Cauchy distribution now so
we we use we instantiate our Cauchy
distribution and the two parameters here
the Alpha is essentially equivalent to
the MU so I set it to 0 and the beta is
a scaling parameter that controls the
discrete set the width of the
distribution so it's not equivalent but
it's conceptually similar to the
standard deviation I guess you could say
so this is a free parameter that I
allowed to skip to the data for beta
equals
half-normal because i don't believe it
can be negative then I set it very wide
very wide probability because I'm not
sure really what should be the real
value and here I had trouble using MC MC
so you can see that I'm using the ad V
approach and I'm even adding some extra
tweaking parameters I'm telling it to
use as the optimization algorithm behind
it to use the atom algorithm when a
learning rate of point zero zero one so
that's an extra tweaking it was a bit
difficult to fit this data with the
Cauchy one it's more computationally
difficult I guess and then I sample from
that I draw 10,000 samples make
predictions and then I do the same thing
so I will show you the histogram of my
Kochi model versus again the histogram
of the real data and it looks like this
so already that the notion of a very
narrow center is there it's much closer
it's still not totally there however if
you see that the returns can apparently
go occasionally up 2.5 or even 1 so that
the tails appear to be too wide actually
but it's much closer well the reason I
know it's much closer is because I've
computed the root mean square errors and
compared them so but even visually you
might get a sense that it's closer so
here I'm gonna introduce a new concept
so the L so if you look at the
documentation for Primus III they
recommend using this metric to do model
selection so to estimate how well your
model fits your data there's also the
wake w AIC but they say that this one
for finite samples it's better it
approximates better the data then the
wake but asymptotically the wake and the
rule let's say
matches usually yeah to be honest are
not familiar with how they compute this
value so I won't go too much into it
but it's based on so it's all based on
likelihood value from the estimated
model that's all you you know you can do
p.m. dot compare and then compare to
models to model one my Gaussian you said
you give it the trace that you use in
that model and model to microchip and
give it the trace and then I specify
that the information criteria I want to
compare with is the loop and then I
output that table so the table is this
here so the first column is the actual
Lu value so just like you know if you've
looked at lot likelihood values in
previous modeling you'll see that it's
always like a big negative values are
usually so the the more negative or
basically the smaller the value the
better the model is so the first one
they're ordered by basically the first
one is the better one the better fit one
column to look at is the last one shape
worn so if this value is one for one of
your models you might have some
numerical instability issues so you
probably cannot trust this comparison
but in our case it's zero
the standard error represents kind of
the uncertainty about this new estimate
the D Lu is the Delta between the two so
we'll just take this one is this
essentially the Gaussian models new
value is 80 mm plus higher than the cost
model which means that it's that much
worse and because the Delta between the
two is much larger than the standard
error it's safe to
that the Koshi model is much better than
the gaussian model and the last example
here yeah have time okay so the last
example is pair trading so I'm going to
create a data set where one asset
follows the price level of another asset
noisily so it will you know they will
diverge a little bit but overall they
kind of follow each other plus some
fixed distance between the two and I
will build a Bayesian model to be able
to estimate that the hedging ratio that
I should use if I want to trade this and
the rate of mean reversion that I can
expect
okay so I generate the two point yet
okay so so when I do pair trading
basically what I'm doing is I'm buying
that many shares of stock a and I'm
shorting that many shares of stock be
okay but it's not necessarily one-to-one
relationship right if if one of them is
$100 a share and the other is $50 a
share I'll probably want to buy twice
the stout B for each share divided by of
stock a because it's twice as cheap
right so - B - B dollar neutral to have
the same amount of the investment in my
long position as in my short position I
need to figure out what's that ratio of
the share that I'm going to buy so I get
a total market neutral portfolio
essentially does that make sense
so that's one thing that I want to
estimate and the other thing is going to
be the rate of mean reversion which
means when those two stocks when their
prices diverge from each other how
quickly can I expect them to come back
and don't and thus make money right
because mean reversion you wait for them
to for the spread increase and then you
take a position long one short the other
because you know that it will come back
together so you make money when they
come back right that's the general idea
so I generate data so I do it in a loop
I start with X which is just a random
walk yes
so I take the last x value and I add a
draw from a random draw from a normal
distribution centered around zero with a
standard deviation of 0.5 and for the y
here I take the last value of y I add
some noise but also because Y and X need
to be Co integrated so they need to
follow each other in price more or less
and so 0.8 y Y is zero point eight I
need to explain that first it's because
the baseline price of my Y is 80% of the
baseline price
my ex so that the true hedging ratio
that we were talking about that we're
trying to estimate is point eight right
so I introduced that in my data
generation code so 0.8 times X minus y
this gives me so point eight times X
minus y gives me the current deviation
of one stock from the other times the
rate of mean reversion will give me by
how much I need to correct Y to follow X
ok so I plot those two so I'm going to
show you first what it looks like
so in orange is y let's say and actually
because it's 40 I think it's why the 40
is X for this y yeah so in orange is y
in blue is X so you see that the
distance between them is not always
perfectly the same but it kind of
follows when one drops the other drops
right so they tend to follow each other
which means that when temporarily they
deviate from each other you can don't
take a short position in X in a long
position in Y and you will make money
because you know that over time they
come back to some certain distance
between each other now this okay let me
first show the code for that now because
what I'm trying to do is estimate a
ratio between the two so how many times
X with respect to Y first I do when the
first thing I do is I transform I
transform the distance between the two
as a ratio of Y to X so Z is my spread
so it is equal to Y divided by X okay
let me show you that what that looks
like
so the the ratio the distance between
the two the ratio we're looking at is
0.8 right if you remember how I wrote
the code the ideal hedging ratio is 0.8
so you see that the spread between the
two the ratio kind of revolves around
that point 8 but it will spike sometimes
because the y so it's Y divided by X so
the high values means that the Y
suddenly spiked but X did not follow
when that happens we know that it's
gonna spike down because we know that
this spread between the two will keep
mean reverting around this ideal hedging
ratio right so in this point here we
stand to make a lot of money by shorting
Y and going along X I think okay so okay
a new concept so Euler Euler Maruyama I
don't know how to pronounce that let's
call it Euler my narayana what it does
okay let me go to the slides that I made
about that so Euler Maruyama
this is a method in pi MC 3 that allows
you to estimate the parameters of a
stochastic differential equation of this
form so you have a value let's say in
this case it's going to be the spread or
the the ratio of Y and X or Z variable
so some value of that at time T is equal
to its past value plus some function of
its past value plus a coefficient times
of noise right so DW is the Brownian
motion so it's just draws from a normal
distribution and B is a scaling effect
to that noise so that's what they call
the diffusion term so it's just a noise
term it introduces noise in your
stochastic process this is the the
her monistic term so it's like the trend
or the kind of that's the structure in
your data and your process and it is
some arbitrary function of the past
value of y okay and the way you write
that in Phi mc3 so you'll define a
function SD it doesn't have to be called
SD but it's the convention so you're
like SD and I defined it as a lambda
function it always takes X so X is your
YT minus 1 so it's your past value and
then you're going to define what you do
with that past value so the function
returns a couple a couple of two values
the first one responds to the
deterministic term so your function of
YT minus 1 and the second one
corresponds to your noise term you're
actually your scaling coefficient for
your noise so then you will instantiate
a Euler Maruyama class or object I
should say this give it a name so DT is
the DT component in this I always set it
to 1 I'm not sure in which case you want
to do something else than that I don't
really I don't see the point of that but
usually one word now this is where you
specify this custom function which is
your SD here and then you pass it some
parameters so this can be as many
parameters as you want it depends on
what is that function that you apply on
the last value of y can be a lot of
things you can multiply a bunch of
different free random variables together
or whatever it is but then you just you
need to specify the shape of your data
yeah the rest is like
okay okay but but I don't I don't
control the W though if you look at it
if you look at the code what all I pass
is B right so when I passes this value
here maybe yeah I guess I'm missing a
concept here with the DT so the first
element so yeah I said that already but
the first element of the SD topple is
some transformation of X which is our YT
minus 1 in the formula using some of the
parameters passed to the function okay
so in a way you can think of this as a
generalization of the Gaussian random
walk because we've looked at how it's
possible to have a prior distribution of
another variable that evolves through
time so random walk is YT equals YT
minus 1 plus some noise so random walk
you just remove this there's no
deterministic effect other than just 0
for 0 so now let's go to the actual code
that I use here ok so I'm going to model
this as a mean reverting so the spread
that we're looking that we were looking
at I'm going to be modeling that as a
mean reversion process so my SDE is
defined as some data which is the speed
of mean reversion which happens to
correspond to the theta in the way I I
in the code that I used to generate the
data times the difference between
coefficients so typically actually this
is it's named appropriately for this
particular problem but usually what
you'll see is that this is the mu right
if you know about Einstein will embed
processes
basically you have a some equilibrium
some mean and the value of x revolves
around that mean so mu minus X tells you
how much it has deviated from that mean
therefore the next increment must bring
it back towards that mean by that
coefficient theta is how quickly you go
back to that main move but in this case
because moot happens to represent the
hedging ratio we're looking for I called
it coefficient so I define this
stochastic differential equation and
then I instantiate a Euler Maruyama
object and the rest is here this is
pretty straightforward the length of my
data and I add the observed right
because I'm fitting the Zed if you
remember that's the spread or my ratio I
should say and now the free random
variables are theta the coefficient my
hedging ratio so theta is the speed a
mean reversion coefficient is my hedging
ratio and Sigma is the noise in hearing
the noise inherent in the model and
finally I do my sampling and I plot the
trace I also output the mean of those
values and if we're successful the theta
should be zero point eight and know I'm
wrong the tailor should be 0.02 or close
and the hedging coefficient should be
point eight so first of all thus this is
the trade the trace plot so the theta
point zero point zero two is at least
within the range is pretty close and the
coefficient I said the point eight which
is probably around here so pretty close
there's a bit of uncertainty around it
though and I when I output the values to
the expectation it's hard to see I guess
well
a zoom in on that maybe that's too
zoomed in but so theta is zero point
zero one six eight almost point zero two
and the hedging ratio is 0.8 one almost
point eight
yeah
in fact one thing I wanted to do my
didn't have time to do is to actually
make that hedging ratio time varying so
you make a hedging ratio where we in
real life is what you'll get is that
this edging ratio is not a constant
thing that will last forever right it it
kind of drifts so you can a but you can
model that as a as a stochastic non
stationary variable and all that but
there's a lot more you can go into with
this yeah this is their forum if you
have if you want to start using final C
3 and you have problems with it you can
post there this is a great book for
Bayesian inference in general but
there's a PI M C 3 examples in here you
can download this it's free this book
you have the PDF you can download this
is the documentation and Thomas wiki is
one of the main developers of - III he
has a really nice blog about all these
things he's won one of the people were
inspired my current approach to data
science I guess you could say so is a
there's a really good blog and that's
that